Namuday, welcome to another video. In
today's video, I'm going to be answering
a question from the comments. So the
question is, please tell us how to be
mentally strong. We need it very much.
So let's talk about this today. How to
be mentally strong and how to develop a
strong mindset. Well, first of all,
let's take a look at what is a strong
mindset is. Now just take a look at this
dharmapha verse from the Buddha. The
Buddha said,
As a rock that is unshaken by the storm,
so too the wise are unshaken by the
praise and the blame. Now have you seen
these big masses of rock. No matter how
fast the wind blows, it is not [music]
shaken. The Buddha said, "Same like that
rock, the wise people, they are unshaken
by the praise and the blame in their
life." and that [music] is a strong
mindset. So in this video I'm going to
be sharing with you few tips that you
can practice to build up a strong
mindset. Tip number one is to maintain a
stable mindset in ups and downs in life.
Right? You know life is like an ocean.
Sometimes ocean is calm and quiet and
peaceful and sometimes it is stormy.
Right? We face ups and downs in life.
The Buddha said these are called eight
worldly conditions at loca dhama that
means praise and blame gain and loss,
fame and disgrace and pleasure and pain.
These are the eight worldly conditions
that we [music] face in our life.
Remember these things. So Buddha said
accept these ups and downs in life.
Whenever people criticize you, whenever
people blame you, whenever you go
through tough times in your life, if you
can be mindful about your mind and your
emotions and your feelings and not to be
not to chase after these emotions and
feelings, then you can be more stable in
these situations. You can maintain a
good emotional balance in these
situations. So it is very important to
be mindful and to be to practice the
selfawareness in these situations. And
also remember you will not be able to
always get the sweet comments and sweet
opinions and sweet experiences in your
life. Life will give tough times to you.
Life will throw lemons at you. So you
have to maintain a stable mindset
whenever whenever you go through these
situations [music]
by practicing the mindfulness and the
selfawareness.
Remember that tip number two is to build
the resilience inside the mind. You know
the resilience means the ability to
stand up and bounce back when you go
through the adversities and when you go
through the challenging situations in
your life.
to know to practice this. One thing that
you have to know and you one thing that
you have to understand is that what is
in your control and what is not in your
control. If you have a good
understanding about what is in my
control in my life and what is not in my
control in my life, right? For an
example, if people comes up to you and
if they if they're starting to criticize
you, th those criticisms, those words
that other people speaks about you is
not under your control. But what is in
your control is your reaction to them.
It is always a choice. You can think
about this like should I should I become
angry with this? Should I take this
negativity? Should I share this
negativity with them and be negative as
them? If you can question like that,
then you're not ready to take that
negativity. And also remember having a
strong mindset does not mean that you're
falling down and you are feeling hurt
and you're feeling down. Having a strong
mindset means you can stand up as soon
as possible when you go through these
tough situations. you can quickly stand
up and you can quickly uh retrieve back
to the normal situations in your life.
That is called the resilience. So to
practice this you have to have a good
understanding about what is in your
control in your life and what is not in
your control. The experiences happens to
you and the things that people say to
you, other people's opinions, other
people's uh thoughts about you is not
under your control.
But all the things that is inside your
mind, your opinions about them, your
reaction to those experiences totally
under your control. So if something is
not under your control, you don't want
to worry about it because you cannot
make any change about it. But if
something is under your control,
definitely you can make a change about
it. You can change your choice but not
others. So remember that. And also you
have to cultivate a problemsolving
mindset. If you're easily panicked by
the problems or if you're easily
triggered by the problems then it is not
easy to solve the problems right but if
you can maintain a calm and a peaceful
mindset even when you go through the
problems or tough situations in your
life then it is very easy to go into the
roots and solve the problems. Sometimes
we we take the problems as ourself like
we think we are the anger. I am this
problem. Why is this happening to me?
Right? Remember everything that that
happens to you will be impermanent. It
is not permanent thing. Right? It will
be changed one day. So what do you have
to do? Keep that problem aside and try
to dive into the roots of that problem.
Ask from yourself why this thing
happened to me, right? What is the
reason for this? Right? What is the real
reason for this? Where did I made the
mistakes? And go to that problem. Go to
the root and then you can solve that
problem. That is how you build up a
problem-solving mindset. And finally,
tip number three, last but not least,
you have to practice a mindset [music]
of self-love and self-compassion.
Remember, if you're loving yourself, if
you truly love yourself, you're not
going to take other people's negativity
with you,
right? You're not going to you're not
ready to take other people's negativity
with you. Whatever the thing that comes
up to you, whatever the person comes up
to you and like bring their negativity
with you, you say, "Well, I'm not going
to take this negativity with me. I want
to be peaceful. I want to love myself. I
truly love myself. Therefore, I'm not
ready to take your negativity. I'm not
sharing this negativity with you. That
is called self-love and self-compassion.
Right? To practice this, you can add up
a simple practice that you can do it
daily. Right? When you get up early in
the morning, just sit on your bed and
think no matter what happens during the
day, I am going to love myself.
I'm not going to take any negativity
from this world. Right? I'm going to
empty my bin and I'm going to take a nin
to this world. Right? Do you know if
you've kept all the bad things and trash
in your bin for a long time, what will
happen? If you in your trash bin, it
will start to smell. No. But if you
remove every single day all the trash in
your bin and make it clean a pl, make it
a clean place, then it's very easy to
live. It's very easy to be peaceful with
it. So practice the self-compassion and
self- love to build a strong mindset.
Some people think that the people who
are easily lose their temper. Some
people think that people who are who
show their toughness and rudeness they
are they have this strong mindset. But
no anger and showing this uh negativity
is not a sign of strength. It's a sign
of weakness. Right? If you are easily
triggered by people, if you're easily
triggered by the people's reactions,
then it's not a strong mindset.
The strong mindset is the mindset that
is not disturbed by the ups and downs in
[music] your life. So practice these
simple steps, right? Build a stable
mindset. Make your mind a resilient one.
And finally, love yourself more than any
other person in this world. When you
practice these steps, you can build up a
mindset that is unshaken by the ups and
downs in your life. So, I wish you all
may all of you find the happiness in
your life. A quick question. Are you
having sleepless nights because of these
heavy loads of thoughts that are coming
and looping inside your mind?
Or are you someone who is imagining the
worst case scenarios all the time
whenever you're going to do something
new?
Or are you someone who is worrying about
what other people will think of me?
Well, if you are such a person, you
might be overthinking.
So, let's find out a way that where we
can get out of our head and quit
overthinking and get the works done. So,
what we can do for this? Well, the first
and the foremost thing that you have to
do is to realize that overthinking is
not going to help you in the process.
Right? You can plan, you can analyze,
but do not overdo it. If you are over
planning, if you are overanalyzing,
it's not going to help you. Right? It
will distract you, distract you from the
process. The first thing that you have
to realize is that overthinking is not
going to help you. The second thing you
can practice to be mindful. Now this is
a practice that that you can do to stop
overthinking to be mindful to [music]
practice the mindfulness.
So how can we practice the mindfulness?
So there are many ways that our great
[music] teacher supreme Buddha taught
taught us to be mindful. One of them is
to be mindful about the breathing
pattern
which we called ana panasati.
Right? When you become more mindful
about this inhale and exhale
your mind instantly come to the present
moment.
Right now you're only thinking about
inhale and exhale. You're being mindful
about that. Now instantly you reduced
these thousands and thousands and
looping thoughts to two thoughts. What
are those two two thoughts? Inhale and
exhale. So when you're thinking like
that [music] and when you become mindful
normally automatically you will find the
peacefulness and you will stop
overthinking about [music] these things
right. So whenever you catch yourself
overthinking what you have to do take
three deep breaths in and out
right and just stay for a while by being
mindful about your breathing pattern
or you can be mindful about your body
right you can ask from yourself that how
am I sitting now [music] right what am I
doing now and you ask these things from
yourself you can answer these things
like I'm sitting Now you can recognize
when you do do these things you can be
mindful. If you're mindful your mind is
in the present moment and when your mind
is in the [music] present moment your
mind is in the peacefulness. There's a
saying and it goes like this. If you are
sad then your mind is in the past.
If you are anxious your mind will be in
the future. But if you are peaceful
[music] and if you are still, your mind
is in the present moment. So start
living in [music] the present moment.
Right? When you live in the present
moment, when you live right here, right
now, you can be more peaceful and you
can stop these overthinking patterns.
Right? And also there's another part of
overthinking. What is that? The what if
question, right? So many people ask from
them that what if this happened what if
this not [music] happens right what if
everything that I did was wrong they are
constantly thinking about the these
[music] things like that right they're
imagining these worst case scenarios
so I must say something about them right
so if you're thinking this what if
question again and again you can ask
from yourself What if everything that I
did was okay?
You can be positive. What if everything
that I've planned and I've done was
really great.
So that can happen. There is always many
possibilities for your plans to go okay.
So don't be negative. Always things
think I'm not going to be perfect,
right? I cannot be perfect but I can be
the best version of myself. I can do my
best. I must do my best and be [music]
positive and go for it and take risks.
Without taking risks, we cannot be
successful in our lives. So practice
these things, right? Be more mindful,
right? be more kind to yourself and
always think that if I overthink, if I
constantly worry about myself, it will
kill the peacefulness of my life. So I
hope this video gave some light to your
life. So be peaceful and be mindful and
get out of your head and start doing the
work that you haven't done.
Third one Saturday night.