Hello everyone and welcome to another
video with today is a lucky day. We
record two videos for you and this time
we uh speak a bit about the the topic of
I guess you could call it call it
enduring
mind that is uh quite agitated that is
really acting up against you uh which is
a situation that most people are
probably quite familiar with. they don't
really know how to escape it and uh how
to make an end to it or how to be with a
mind that is agitated
or how to be at peace while that is the
case without
uh falling into despair. Maybe that's a
good good topic. Yeah. Um hello size
cat.
Yeah.
Do you have a have a take on that topic?
What would you advise a person who is
obviously doing something or have having
have done something wrong in the past
but that they are quite affected by the
whims of their minds and now they don't
really know how to deal with it. What
could they do in such a moment to maybe
improve their practice a bit? How could
they could they at least not make it
worse? How would you approach that?
Good question. Um
I think it's also a very difficult one.
It's quite a delicate question. Um I
think there's a large gulf between the
average practitioner's experiences and
the ideals of the practice. Um the idea
of the practice it says in theatana is
when the mind whatever state it's in
you're not really rejecting that mind
you're sort of patient with it. So even
if the mind's actually experiencing uh
grief and disconolation and it's just
sort of uh very agitated. you're not
supposed to really try to reject that
mind or solve it because even if you get
relief out of that solving um the
underlying problem which is that you're
affected in the first place is is still
there. So the practice is more or less
about trying to be patient with any
state of mind not breaking the virtue
the sort of ways in which we try to
escape that through sensuality or
through anger or through any of those
and just sort of letting it be. But I
think at the beginning uh for most
people uh especially I think in like
modern times where the mind can be quite
uh strongly agitated all times has very
strong impulses um the mind will often
be shouting at you quite a lot. Uh and
it's very hard to be patient during the
time.
Um
I think the main thing I would say
immediately cuz I think some people
don't really realize straight away um is
not to focus too much first of all on
the actual experience of agitation
itself because it's extremely likely I
think for the vast majority of people
that way before the mind has gone to
that stage uh there's been loads of
micro actions and micro impulses that
one has been following that has allowed
it to get to that uh stage. It's very
hard to see at the beginning. I think uh
it's normally only after you've kind of
failed loads of times and you realize
why why is my mind getting agitated all
of a sudden you start to look a bit more
deeply and you start to realize actually
yeah before my mind is sh sensual
experience I've already been sort of
careless and trying to uh delighting in
idle chatter or delighting in just
mentally the idea of looking forward
later on to eating certain food or so
on. Um so the first thing I would say
immediately is to have a look about what
you're doing the time when you were
supposedly calm because the mind it
genuinely cannot become the agitated
unless you are actively involved in it
to some degree. Again it's kind of hard
to see at the beginning. Uh but this is
where in the sutas gradual training
there's that aspect of danger in the
slightest fault. it becomes actually not
just something you're doing for the sake
of it, but it just becomes a natural
part of the experience because you
realize, yes, I'm at work. Um, often
when I get home after work, my mind
shouting at me to engage in 2 hours of
entertainment, whatever, and it's just
well, yeah, it's getting intense. Some
people experience much more intenser,
but this is one form of um intense
sensual urge. But actually, while you're
at work, while you're kind of calm, did
you at some point have the thought of
I'm going to go home and sort of just be
comfortable and enjoy myself? And did
you sort of not in necessarily in a
super agitated way, but you just sort of
accepted it? Just delighted in it,
thought, "Yeah, that's fine. Yeah, that
sounds quite good, actually." And again,
it's not necessarily going to be some
big massive craving that you see, but
it's actually this small sort of micro
accepting that you're doing. And if you
do that, your mind is basically prepping
you for this sort of uh larger form of
uh intoxication. It's basically baiting
you out. And if you do lots of those
micro acceptance uh accepting when you
get to that later stage, your mind has
already uh been prepped for it. And
actually it becomes at that point almost
too late. uh not necessarily you can't
do anything but your mind has been
following it for so long that the
momentum is there um so I would say the
first thing immediately would be not to
look at the specific experience of
agitation but try to look at what's uh
beforehand and you'll probably see quite
a lot of um craving going on beforehand
uh so that could be one possible uh
solution
>> yeah that sounds pretty good and very
consistent with how things develop for
most people I would say I think there's
almost always a buildup like giving in
to the to the impulses of the mind is a
habit. It's not something that you do
just once a day or something along those
lines. It's something that you do on a
consistent basis. That's why the mind
has so much power over you because you
do it so often and you gave that mind so
much power over you. I guess that's a
good way of looking at at it. And when
you are in a situation where the mind is
kicking and screaming then it's because
it is so well fed and only because you
have let it run loosely for so long and
now it has so much control over you and
you don't really know how to deal with
it and in such a situation to must up
the the strength and the courage to to
act up against that mind and don't
follow its impulses that's very very
difficult for the vast majority of
people. I would say it can be done
sometimes for a person who's generally
practicing. They could have with some
some guidance maybe uh a bit of a of a
moment of understanding when you tell
them for example yeah instead of looking
at the specifics of your experience.
Maybe try to make peace with the fact
that the mind is acting up right now
because by default without any point
where it went all wrong, you are already
accepting the mind at face value. You
are already in the in the general
movement of wanting to get away from
whatever the mind is pointing at.
Whenever it wants you to get some
sweets, you already want some sweets.
You're not seeing it as a mind of greed.
You're not seeing it as a as a central
impulse but as you wanting all of that
and the disconnect that is kind of
necessary for any kind of reflection to
go on is not there at that moment
because you are yeah right in the middle
of it. It is the center of your
experience and you will have to kind of
accept suddenly accept in that in that
moment that there is just the mind full
of agitation that it's going to fine
that it is there and that you don't
really have to obey all of its commands.
But as I've mentioned before when you
have given in many many times in many
various different ways before then that
is very difficult to do.
I In fact, uh I would actually suggest
people to focus much much more on the
things prior to to such a situation and
not try to find a fix in a situation
like that but train and prepare yourself
for such situations in advance. I think
that's a much better way as you
mentioned looking of looking at it.
What are your thoughts?
Um
>> because
>> I definitely agree you're concern
>> because most of the time people probably
want a quick fix for exactly the
situations when they are feeling bad and
dreadful.
Sorry. Yeah.
>> Yeah. there needs to be like um larger
focus on just wakefulness at all times
even when you're supposedly calm because
actually if you look deeply um there are
all sorts of agitation uh even within
that I think um
let's say someone is trying to be uh
mindful of that um but then for whatever
reason still the mind is starting to
shower you and it's it's getting quite
intense to a point where even if you
kind of acknowledge mentally that, you
know, I'm not supposed to be sort of
acting out of it and so on and trying to
just be calm within it. Um, you're
starting to feel like I'm getting to the
edge and I'm starting to likely to break
precepts and so on. Um, or just to sort
of distract myself, whatever it is. Um,
what what would be your advice in that
situation, do you think?
>> Well, that's a different a difficult
one. I mean there probably are such
situations for most people and in fact
for many people probably quite
frequently.
Um
I guess one way that you could go about
it is to
maybe
not give the mind exactly what it wants.
So maybe there's a mind that is uh
screaming very loudly for a piece of
cake or for some sweets or for some
entertainment Netflix stuff or whatever.
And maybe it's screaming so loudly that
you don't really see any possibility not
to give in. Maybe
in such a situation you could say okay
well we will give you something but not
exactly what you want. as in it wants a
piece of cake and maybe you go to I
don't know the nearest supermarket and
buy it one piece of candy or something
like that and uh be done with it like it
I guess it it moves away some it directs
away some power of the mind that it
usually has over you are certainly
giving in to some degree but only to
some degree the mind is not fully
getting what it wants and that is maybe
one way in which you could wean yourself
off of this quite strong grip that the
mind usually has on you because it won't
if you're really in it then in many
cases you won't be able to say no at
least when you are not very well trained
when you have not been following this
gradual approach
>> defin yeah yeah I definitely agree I
think um I mean if you try to
immediately um follow this idea of never
acting out of your mental states be in
peace with them like that would just be
living, you know, like the Buddha did
back in the days. You'd be living in the
forest and you would just be by yourself
and you just be no entertainment, no
need for anything, no possessions. Um,
that's
unrealistic for the vast majority of
people to turn like that overnight. So
there needs to be some sort of u gradual
wise approach. um but you engage in
without at the same time justifying it
to yourself and saying well actually it
doesn't really matter if I engage in
smaller amounts of sensuality it's it's
still you know overall it's harmful at
the ultimate level uh but I think like
you said there needs to be some sort of
gradual approach I mean I I know people
who are
u so deep in anger I think we talked
about before that like they they
literally will if they get set off they
will just start throwing things across
the whole room and start hating people
and it's there's no way for them
overnight to start being calm with their
mental state and just become this
Buddhist monk and it's just impossible.
Um so for them you know obviously try to
do the things where you are mindful
beforehand what's going to set you off
try to u not follow these thoughts and
so on but if it starts to sh you there's
ways in which you can
um engage in cop mechanisms so to speak
that are less severe less intense and
don't give your mind everything that
it's looking for. Um,
like you said, one example is if it's
shouting for a specific piece of food,
you might give it something, but not the
exact food it's mentioning. Um, and it's
like you say, it's taking away some of
that power that the mind has over you.
Uh, I mean, some people are extremely
addicted to entertainment, for example.
It's, you know, from the day from the be
beginning of the day right to the end of
the day, they've got some sort of
entertainment, podcast, music, TV show,
whatever it is. Um so again it's it's
really impossible for them overnight to
just start off let me just start
enjoying every single central mind
state. Focus on that for sure but
sometimes your mind will start getting
really antsy. Um so try to do something
that's uh not exactly what your mind's
going for something less severe. Um,
so if your mind is uh asking you to play
a video game for 10 hours, uh maybe just
go for a walk and go look at some
flowers or something and uh or even like
again if it's that intense that you just
I used to be a person that I used to
listen to music like 10 hours a day. Um
so I just continued listening to music.
Uh but I would just do it less. I
wouldn't do it for 10 hours a day. I
would do it for 2 hours in the morning
and in the evening or something. Uh but
just gradually start to wean yourself
off it uh instead. Um and then
eventually you sort of start to make
that leap where you just kind of
specifically for the things including
the eight precepts cuz those are the
things that are always um sort of imbued
with craving. You just um don't let your
mind go to it all even when it's
shouting at you. Uh if you just practice
weaning yourself off, I think your mind
will start to get stronger. Um and it
will feel more natural. Um
yeah, I mean I think there are problems
with this approach because you can start
to assume that um the craving is in the
specific activities I'm avoiding.
Obviously, it's always in your mind sort
of uh passionate intentions. I mean, you
can still be craving in regards to very
calm things like going for a walk and
seeing the flowers. You can still be
craving in regards to that. Uh but I do
think um for average person you sort of
focus on the most intense ways in which
those kind of manifests and then you can
start to be more sle about it otherwise
it's just it's just unrealistic for most
people. Um it has to be um applicable to
some degree. Yeah.
>> Yeah. It's I guess uh I'm not sure how
many people respond well to that but
it's a lot like training and lifting
weights. You can't just start
deadlifting the 300 kgs off the floor. I
mean, you can try, but chances are quite
good that you either get hurt or at
least you won't pull it off. Simply no
way for an untrained person to do that.
And even for a trained person, it can
seem quite daunting. But with the right
approach, with the right training, with
doing the right things for a long time,
with optimizing the little aspect of
your life here and there, lots of sleep,
good nutrition and all the things, it
can be done for the vast majority of
people. Unless you're at old, then it's
probably no longer possible. But the
same is also kind of true for the
practice in the dharma. The Buddha
always encouraged us to start a bit
earlier, much earlier than you would
like. It's not good to to start all the
training when you are 60. I mean still
then it's still possible I guess but
much harder simply because you have
accumulated so many coping mechanisms.
Yeah. But overall be gradual about it.
Be develop a mindset that kind of
accepts that there is a broader frame of
reference to the immediiacy of being
influenced by the mind. There are all
those small decisions that you're making
on a daily basis. In fact, you are
probably
driven around by the mind more or less
24/7 without really noticing it. That's
kind of one of the features of the mind
that you don't really notice it
influence since kind of you wanting all
those things. That's how it presents
itself to you. Yeah. And undoing all of
that is quite a daunting task for the
vast majority of people. So, be gradual
about it. Be patient.
like be wakeful. Try to
to really develop a sense of
try to really learn what you are looking
for those small things on a daily life.
Try to assign them the right
significance like not passing them off
as just giving in one time into sweets
is fine. Yeah. Actually, maybe it seems
fine. Maybe it's no big deal in that
situation, but the direction it sends
you in is a very harmful one. It's
usually not the case that you are giving
in big time all at once. It's usually
that it creeps back in over time, even
when you are really watchful. It has a
tendency to sneak back in and then
suddenly you find yourself in the middle
of it, whatever your addiction was. And
that's what you want to to look for.
That's usually how you tend to to fail.
>> Yeah. Think about it like for for a monk
who's quite highly developed, I think um
they wouldn't be having the same like
sensual impulses uh as most people. They
might probably quite calm most of the
time, but they would be able to sense
that if my mind is now starting to even
suggest to me the idea of uh for example
socializing with the people seems quite
innocuous, innocent at first. they will
straight away know that actually if I
accept that the next thing is going to
be asked of me and the next thing is
asked of me and actually the entire sort
of sensual domain it will start rolling
ahead so they are sort of aware of that
danger of the slight
um but I think for us lay people
especially um there's loads of things
that we accept as part of you know this
is just lay life and we not only
physically accept them but mentally
accept them um and then we don't really
realize that actually by doing that even
if we feel Okay. Uh eventually it will
sort of roll uh towards something a lot
bigger.
>> Yeah, it's no
that's how it usually goes and that's uh
where people have a hard time accepting
that the small things do matter quite a
lot even one could even say that that it
is all the small decisions that lead up
to the big failures that we are usually
experiencing or when we are experiencing
them. I think the most most people tend
to fail a lot until they finally make
it.
And I think they should uh in many cases
well this obviously depends a lot on the
person you are dealing with.
But
some people develop um a mindset where
they stop even trying because they know
that they could fail
which is uh quite dangerous and
something that I can observe quite often
especially in people who are naturally
quite averse let's say and that is
that's not not a good way to go about
things. So, I would advise you to um
kind of make peace with how the process
plays out that it is gradual and that
you're only really failing if you stop
trying. If you don't get back up on your
feet and try again, that that is
failure. But if you gave it an honest
attempt, really tried to keep the mind
in check and then have failed so to
speak, um yeah, then it might be a small
setback, but it's not really a failure.
Then okay, maybe you have judged the
degree of graduality that you require a
bit fully. Okay, then try again. Be a
bit more gradual. Try to look out a bit
harder. Maybe there was even tinier
things that have crept in, so to speak.
And then you can look again and try
again. It's a process.
Yeah. I mean even in the sutras um
obviously I think an average person is
not able to see this but you know the
Buddha talks about how um
he sees some people that are right now
they're quite highly developed the
mind's very calm but there's an unh
wholesome root inside of them and the
Buddha can see like over time even
though their mind could be even in Janna
they're actually destined for future and
wholesome states whereas some people are
not very well developed at that time
period and their mind's actually very
agitated and they don't have any
perspective ive but they have some sort
of unh wholesome a wholesome root inside
of them and actually they are destined
for future uh growth so actually it's um
when you see people who are uh more
common mind of you you don't want to
feel defeated and when you look at your
own own harmonious mind you don't want
to feel defeated either um there is this
is kind of why the human state is so
valuable is because it's the most
malleable um it's kind of shocking how
much you can change even within a few
months. Um also I think um another thing
I'll maybe mention is that when the mind
is sort of shouting at you as well
um when the mind is shouting at you,
it's impossible to get large
perspective. That's that's the whole
point, right? The mind is kind of
gripped you by that point. Um so I think
another thing to be wary of is for
people that are very risk averse and so
on. I think they start to almost um
start wondering about
some really long-term um consequences of
this. They think to themselves, well, if
this is the whole practice, if I'm going
to be enjoying this my whole life, this
is something I can't really do. Um it's
kind of again one of the way that ma
tries to sort of trick you, tries to
make you feel a bit more scared. Um then
actually it actually is. Um it's a bit
of a c mechanism but I find it is kind
of useful at the beginning you know to
have this almost u laboratory uh
attitude towards your mind. So when the
um
uh mind is shout on you like this you
just kind of think to yourself well
let's just see what happens like it's
going to shout on me. I might end up
start crying about how difficult it is
but you know let's see what happens just
one time only. I'm not doing the rest of
my life. Let's just let's just see what
happens. And actually, even if it's just
one time that you do that, you might
just end up enjoying it and you realize
it's
not as scary as you thought it was.
That's kind of the thing with Mara's
tricks is that they have loads of ways
to make it seem really scary, but
actually if you enjoy it, Mara is quite
a weakling to be honest. Um, so you can
do that and by having that personal
experience then of seeing the sort of
mind being gripped, not letting it uh
sort of trick you and just letting it
sort of fade away um your mind becomes
more perceptive over its own abilities
and becomes a bit more confident. So I
think another thing uh that's possible
but at the beginning it can be sort of
useful to just have the attitude. It's
just momentarily I'm looking for. I'm
not looking for this big long term and
practice the rest of my life. Just this
moment, just one specific moment. Let's
just see what happens. Um and yeah, you
can you can learn a lot from that. So
that's that's another way I think can be
useful. Yeah, which is I guess another
way of phrasing uh that would be to
you have to approach big tasks that can
seem very very scary and lots of work.
You you kind of have to start somewhere
and some people tend to be paralyzed by
by those things. They're not used to
dealing with large problems all at once.
they get intimidated and uh that's not a
good way to start something. But once
you actually start, I mean, you build
something bit by bit. That's usually how
it goes. There's no need to build an
entire house in one session or something
like that. You just have to start
somewhere and if you do that for long
enough, then uh yeah, suddenly you have
achieved quite a lot over time. That's
usually how it goes. But you have to get
started. You have to try to honestly
try. Even if you honestly tried hard and
then failed, yeah, it's not really a
failure. You definitely have learned
something about yourself. And that's
just another way of phrasing, yeah, I
made quite a bit of progress. It's just
that the mind tends to direct us towards
perceiving it as a failure because then
he gets what what he wants out of you.
So it can be quite healthy to shift the
focus a bit and artificially maybe in
the beginning bring up the positive
aspects of trying really hard and
failing because that's kind of the way
how you make progress
by failing repeatedly. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Like even when you fail um again
it's another one of Mar's tricks that he
starts to turn that failure into
something bigger than it is. Not that
failure is not like something you should
be watchful for. It's not like you can
do whatever you want. But as soon as you
start to fail, Mara will make it like
this ontological failure like you're
some sort of deeply bad guilty person
who's never going to do anything. And
again, that's just again it's not you
thinking those things. It's your mind
sort of trying to trick you into it. And
again, it's a way for ma to try and just
make you give up the practice
altogether, which it's not going to be
helpful. It's actually going to make it
worse over a long period of time. So
there's um you know if you do fail it
will happen at the beginning um you have
to just keep that positivity up even if
you have to force yourself to a certain
degree because uh patience is the as you
keep mentioning it's the name of the
game um it's again it's virtually
impossible especially for average state
of I think modern mind to just become
perfected overnight. It's just it's just
not going to happen. Um
so yeah um
over time you will be uh
surprised by even just within a few
months how much the mind will shower you
like it did before and you're just kind
of this boulder in the middle and it's
just kind of unstoppable from all sort
of uh four waves trying to crash you
from all the sides and then the the
confidence will start to uh naturally
grow. Even then though it's uh this is
again the as you practice more and more
subtle things start to come you start to
realize actually I'm starting to become
more confident and you start delighting
in that confidence and this is another
reason why people start to uh their mind
starts to reassert itself you know the
practice for like few days it might be a
few weeks um and mind's getting calmer
it's not really affecting me as much and
you start getting a bit overconfident uh
again you start slightly accepting
smaller things you're conce seated and
then the mind's like Mars just thinks
this is a field day for me and then the
mind will start shouting at you again
and then back to square one and then you
just think to yourself again you failed
uh after a month oh my god I thought I
was doing good the worst person ever
again Mar's just having a field day with
you so you kind of got to just know
these tricks in advance and realize that
um these are things that are going to
happen to me and I just got to uh stay
above them to whatever extent I can in
the beginning um and Then you know
hopefully in the very long term there
are
um it takes a long time but there there
are genuine places of safety you know
when the Buddha talks about janna and
concentration these are places where
you're uh not on the absolute nana is
your absolute safety but these are
genuine places where you just you just
chill out and the same things used to
bother you before they just don't affect
you in the same way so it's not all sort
of difficulty and gloom along the way
it's just at the beginning you've sort
of let ma just uh uh go wild and it's um
it's going to be difficult to sort of
just unbind yourself from the the bait
you've been sort of involved in. But
yeah um yeah
>> yeah yeah in the beginning it can really
seem like you have to push this big
boulder up a mountain again and again
and again for a very long time but as
you mentioned there are those
concentrated states where suddenly that
effort is no longer necessary and it's
kind of like this boulder rolls up the
hill itself
where yeah the mind is kind of just
doing the right thing.
Yeah, it' be it'd be harder in the same
way that when your mind's agitated, it's
almost impossible to conceive how am I
going to have this calm mind, you know,
when you're in that state, it's
impossible to it starts to become
impossible to conceive how you would
ever go back to a mind where you're just
listening to whatever your mind says.
You just follow all your impulses. It's
just it's just not really conceivable to
you anymore. Um
yeah, I think having like
sources of inspiration can be quite
helpful as well because
um I think the sutas you kind of just
speaking about this before but the
sutras are so focused on uh I think
sometimes not personal examples it's a
lot of the time focused on just the
dharma as an abstract entity
um it's hard to get inspiration from
people who have gone through similar
difficulties. ies um you can kind of
almost feel a bit defeated like look at
these big uh dharma warriors who just
overcome their mind and like in one week
became full enlightened and then you
know look at me I'm just practicing for
a year and not got much to show for it.
Um so I found it useful to sort of read
um sometimes biographies from real life
people who sort of go through the same
struggles because then you realize it's
it's not just me it's it's just natural
part of the training. um not to justify
it to yourself. It's not like you're
saying, "Oh, I'm fine." But it's it's
just normal. It's it's not like uh
you're again your own onlogical failure.
It's just uh it's difficult to practice.
Um so this sort of humanizing aspect to
it I think can be um quite useful and it
just gives you that further faith to
keep practicing because I think at the
beginning especially the the capacity
for glooiness and selfdeeat and
self-hatred can be quite strong unless
you find ways to sort of manage that to
a degree.
Yeah, actually those biographies or
simply
um reports of people who are quite
relatable are very inspiring or have
been extremely inspiring to me because
most of the time people are kind of
hiding their thoughts and then those
autobiographies they're kind of telling
you they tend to be quite honest they
tell you how they have struggled
online if you listen to monks or so on
YouTube they will probably not tell you
how many times they have failed or how
many times. So our they have wasted on
their definement in the past because
it's not very monkish most of the time.
Uh yeah, people usually don't don't
highlight that aspect of their
experience. That's kind of the thing
here. For example, most people don't see
a benefit in telling them that. I don't
know. I have I don't know after
finishing my what's it called? College
degree. In Germany, it's called Abit. I
spent 16 hours of playing video games a
day for an entire year. That was not
very very wholesome and usually there's
not much benefit in telling that to
people but it gives you a good frame of
reference that you are just speaking
with people online that they are not
some magical beings that you can or
should put on a pedestal. Sure they have
achieved something many times but uh
that does not mean that you are not
capable of doing the same thing. Um, as
you mentioned many many times, there's a
lot of room for change once you honestly
start trying and really give it a go
without making excuses to yourself. A
few months so much progress and it's
possible
if you really really put your heart and
soul into it.
Yeah. So I mean so I think this is one
of the reasons why
um we talked before like the the impulse
to sort of share uh ideas about the
dharma is sort of a strange thing
because I think a lot of people who are
practice a lot are tend to be quiet.
They don't tend to want to share them.
They're not conceited people. Um but I
think that's kind for me personally I
feel like it's one of the impulses for
why um I like talking about it time to
time because like you say I think both
of us you know we're not like perfected
people just humans uh also experience
lots of these exact same uh doubt
self-hatred depression numbness um
addictive behaviors and so on and
through the dharma you kind of see uh
the growth the path out of it and
there's a natural inspir relation to
sort of want to share it. Sorry, my
cat's just clawing at this plant. So,
um
so yeah. Um
yeah, I think going back to it like the
these autobiographies are quite
inspirational. Um
I think there's almost like a jewel
aspect here. There's this image of the
Buddha as this sort of complete and
perfect person. uh which I think the
mere thought obviously sort of uh aligns
a character a bit provides inspiration
provides faith but it can be
self-defeating at times just due to how
much of a non-human figure you can see
some sometimes seem like he's a uh
extremely sort of transcendent almost
austere figure uh
so these human figures uh like even
biography of like a child for example
some of these tire forest monks you
might not always by they agree with all
their ideas and so on. But the main it's
about like the the flow of the practice
and restraint and so on. Even like for
example um uh like Christian monks and
so on, you know, they're practicing the
same sort of abandonment of sensuality,
abandonment of hatred. So seeing their
sort of um struggles with this and their
development and how they overcame it uh
can be quite um helpful as well. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Actually, that sounds quite
good. And we are again approaching the
ending of the recording window. So, I
think uh this is a good point to wrap
things up. Uh I hope you have a better
understanding now of how to deal with a
screamy mind as in prepare for it. Don't
think of yourself as too much of a
failure. That's quite normal, quite uh
yeah, human to have those tendencies and
to have those moments and make the most
out of it. Yeah. Apart from that, if you
have any more questions concerning this
or any other topic, feel free to let us
know in the comments. we will read them
and uh if you think it's interesting for
a broader audience, we will make a video
about it. It's nice for us because then
we have something to talk about. But
apart from that, I wish you a pleasant
day and goodbye.